# Useing express.js to create Node.js web app

In this chapter wo cover the follows topics: 

* What Express.js is 
* How Express.js work 
* Express.js installation
* Express.js scaffolding(command-line tool)
* The blog project overview
* Express.js hello worl example

# What is Express.js ?

Express.js is a web framework base on core node.js http module and [Connect](https://github.com/senchalabs/connect#readme) components. The components are called middlware are the cornerstones of the framework philosophy, which configuration over convention. In other words, Express.js system is highly configurable,which allow developers to freely pick whatever libraries they need for a particular project.For these reasons, the Express.js framework leads to flexibility and high customization in the development of web application.

If we write serious Node web apps using only core Node.js modules you most likely find yourself reinveting wheel by writing the same code continually over and over for similar boring mundane tasks, such as following:

* Parsing HTTP request bodies
* Parsing of cookie
* Getting information of URL
* Reading queryString data from URL and request body\
* Managing web session
* Organzing routes with a chain of if condition base on URL path and HTTP mehods of the request
* Determing proper response header base on data types

A good example is worth hundreds of words:
~~~js
const http = require('http')
const util = require('util')
const querystring = require('querystring')
const mongo = require('mongpdb')

const host = process.env.MONGOHQ_URL || 'mongodb://127.0.0.1:27017'

mongo.Db.connect(host, (error, client) => {
  if (error) throw error
  let collection = new mongo.Collection(
    client,
    'test_collection'
  )
  let app = http.createServer(
    (request, response) => {
      if (request.method === 'GET' && request.url === '/messages/list.json') {
        collection.find().toArray((error, results) => {
          response.writeHead(
            200,
            { 'Content-Type': 'text/plain' }
          )
          console.dir(results)
          response.end(JSON.stringify(results))
        })
      }
      if (request.method === 'POST' && request.url === '/message/create.json') {
        response.on('data', (data) => {
          collection.insert(
            querystring.parse(data.toString('utf-8')),
            { safe: true },
            (error, obj) => {
              if (error, obj) => {
                if (error) throw error
                response.end(JSON.stringify(obj))
              }
            }
          )
        })
      }
    }
  )
  const port = process.env.PORT || 5000
  app.listen(port)
})
~~~

# How Express.js Works

Express.js useually has an entry point, a.k.a, the main file. The names of this file typically `server.js`, `app.js` or `index.js`. Most of the time, this is the file that we start with the `node`commond, or export it as amodule, in some cases. And in theis file, we do the following:

1. Include third-party dependencies as well as our own modules, such as controllers, utilities, helpers, and models.
2. Configure Express.js app settings, such as template engine and its rile extensions
3. Define middleware such as error handlers, static file folder, cookies, and other parsers
4. Define routes
6. Start the app
7. Export the app as a module(optional)

When the Express.js app is running, it's listening to requests. Each incoming request is processed accodrding to defined chain of middleware and routes, starting from top to bottom. This aspect is important in controlling the execution flow.For example, routes/middleware that are higher in the file have precedence over the lower definitions.

# Express.js Installation

The Express.js app can be created using two methods:
1. express-generator: A global npm package that provides the command-line tool for rapid app creation(scaffolding)--recommended for quick prototyping and server-side rendering apps.

2. express: A local package module in your Node.js app's `node_modules` folder-- recommended foro any project which needs to import `express` with `require()` or `import`

# Express.js Generator Version

Here is the command to install the latest version:
~~~
npm install -g express-generator@latest
~~~
You can uninstall generator using `sudo npm uninstall -g express-generator` or `sudo npm uninstall -g express`.

# Express.js Scaffolding

# Express.js Command-Line Interface
Now we can use the CLI to spawn new Express.js apps.
~~~js
express -c styl express-styl
cd express-styl && npm install
DEBUG=my-application ./bin/www
~~~
Open the browser of your choice at http://localhost:3000 and you'll see "Express Welcome to Express" styled with a CSS which is coming from a Stylus file (.styl). If you go to http://localhost:3000/users, then you'll see "respond with a resource". 

# Route in Express.js
When you open express-styl/app.js you see two routes in the middle:
~~~js
const index = require('./routes/index')
const users = require('./routes/users')
...
app.use('/', routes)
app.use('/users', users)
~~~
However, it's trivial to write your own middleware.
~~~js
app.use((req, res, next) => {

})
~~~
That' right. The middleware is just a functino with thress argument.Two of which are good old friends: request and response.Then third argument is a callback that is invoked then all is down.
~~~js
app.use((req, res, next) => {
  next()
})
~~~

Developers can alse finish the response with `send()`,`end()`, `render()` or any other Express method, or pass error object to the `next()` callback
~~~js
app.use((req, res, next) => {
  if (!req.session.loggedIn) {
    return next(new Error('Not enough permissions'))
  }
  if (req.session.credits === 0) {
    return res.render('not-enough-credits.pug')
  }
  next
})
~~~

Let's take a look at another example that has some logic to deal with a query string data useing the `req.query` object
~~~js
app.use((req, res, next) => {
  if (req.query.id) {
    // Process the id, then call next() when done
  else if (req.query.author) {
    // Same approach as with id
  else if (req.query.id && req.query.ref) {
    // Process when id and ref present
  } else {
    next();
  }
});

app.get('/about', (req, res, next) => {
    // This code is executed after the query string middleware
});
~~~
What's useful is that each `req` or `request` object in the subsequent middlware functions for request handler functions(i.e., routes) is the same object for the same request.This allows developers to decoreate a reference or a value.For example, by having this middleware we can ensure that all subsequent middleware and routes have access to db:

~~~js
app.use((req, res, next) => {
  req.db = cont db = mongoskin.db('mongodb://@localhost:27017/test')
})

app.use((req, res, next) => {
  req.articles = req.db.collection('articles')
})

app.post('/users',(req, res, next) => {
  req.db.collection('users').insert({}, {}, (error, results) => {
    req.articles.insert({},{}, (error, result) => {
      res.send()
    })
  })
})
~~~

# Middleware as the Backbone of Express.js
Each line/statement above the routes in `express-styl/app.js` is middleware
~~~js
const express = require('express')
const path = require('path')
const favicon = require('serve-favicon')
const logger = require('morgan')
const cookieParser = require('cookie-parser')
const stylus = require('stylus')
...
app.use(favicon(path.join(__dirname, 'public', 'favicon.ico')));
app.use(logger('dev'));
app.use(bodyParser.json());
app.use(bodyParser.urlencoded());
app.use(cookieParser());
app.use(express.static(path.join(__dirname, 'public')));
~~~
Middleware includes pass-through functions that either do something useful or add something helpful to the request as it travels along each of theme.

# Configuring an Express.js App

Here is how we define configuration statements in a typical Express.js app (the `app.js` file) with the use of `app.set()` methods, whick take the name as a first argument and the value as the second.

~~~js
app.set('views', path.join(__dirname, 'view'))
app.set('view engine', 'pug')
~~~

And then in the bin/www ifle, you will see hte statement that saves the value of the port, which will be used later during the server bootup. The value is coming either from the environment variable or the hard-coded value of 3000 as a fallback when the environment  variable `PORT` is undefiend.

~~~js
app.set('port', process.env.PORT || 3000)
~~~

#Pug Is haml for Express.js/Node.js

The Pug template engine is akin to the Ruby on Rails' Haml in the way it uses whitespace and indentation, such as layout.pug.
~~~pug
doctype html
html
  head
    title = title
    link(rel='stylesheet', href='/stylesheets/style.css')
  body
    block content 
~~~
Yes, it mighgt look weird, and yes, you might hate it [http://webapplog.com/jade](http://webapplog.com/jade) in the beginning because of a missing white space that breaks your app, but believe me:Pug is awesome... whten you know it.Luckily, there's a whole chapter(Chapter 4) dedicated to template, and you can learn Pug in there.

# The Blog Project Overview

Our Blog app consists of five main parts from the user perspective

* A home page with a list of articles
* An individual articel page with the full-text article
* An admin page for publishing and remvoing content
* A login page for accessing the aforementioned admin page
* A post article page for add new content

From a developer's point of view , the app has the following elements:
* Main file `app.js`: Settings, inclusions of routes, and other important logic. This is the file we typically run with `node` to start the server.
* Routes: All the logic related to pages and abstracted from `app.js` based on functional meaning, such as gettin the data from the database and compiling the data into HTML
* Node.js project file `package.json`: Dependencies and other meta data
* Dependencies in `node_modules`: Third-party modules installed via `package.json`
* Templates: The `*.pug` files
* Static files: Such as `*.css` or browser `*.js`
* Configuration file `config.json`: Security-insensitive application-wide settings, such as app title

# The app.js file
A typical structur of the main Express.js file `app.js` consists of the following areas:
1. require dependencies
2. configure setting
3. connect to database
4. define middleware
5. define routes
6. start the server on particular port
7. start workers with clusters to scale 

The order her is important, because requrests travel from top to bottom in the chain of middleware

The way routes are defined in Express.js is with helpers `app.VERB(url, fn1, fn2,...,fn3), where `fnNs` are requrest handlers, url is on URL pattern in RegExp, and VERB values are  as follows:
* all: catch any request,i.e. all HTTP methods
* get: catch GET request
* post: catch POST request
* put: catch PUT requrest
* patch: catch PATCH request
* del: catch DELETE request

Routes are processed in the order in which they are defined.Usually, routes are put after middleware, but some middleware may be placed following the routes.A good example of such middleware, found after routes, is an error handler.

~~~js
app.all('*', function (res, res) {
  res.render('index', {msg: 'Welcome to Practical Node.js'})
})
~~~

For reference, in `res.render(viewName, data, callback(error, html)) where parameters mean the following:
* viewName: A template name with filename extension or if `view engine` is set without the extension
* data: An optional object that is passed as 'locals`
* callback: An optional function that is called with an error ande HTML when the compilation is complete

`res.render()` is not in the Node.js core and is purely an Express.js addition that, if invoked, calls core `res.end()`, which ends/completes the response. In other words, the middleware chain doesn't processed after `res.render()`.

Last but not least are the instructions to start the server. There are two ways in the express.js app, `app.listen()` and `http.createServer(app).listen()`


