# Persistence with MongoDB and Mongoskin

# install mongoDB 

online document [https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/installation/#supported-platforms](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/installation/#supported-platforms)

My workstation's system is window 10 with WSL.i thought it good work to install it by follow the way intall mongodb on linux. But i failed to install mongoDB on my workstation in the first time . I found the issues about resolve[https://github.com/Microsoft/WSL/issues/3286#issuecomment-436999269](https://github.com/Microsoft/WSL/issues/3286#issuecomment-436999269).

1. download the key manually

```
wget https://www.mongodb.org/static/pgp/server-4.0.asc
```
2. add key manually

```
sudo apt-key add server-4.0.asc
```

3. remove the download fil
```
rm server-4.0.asc
```

4. update the package list
```
sudo apt-get update
```

5. install mongodb-org
```
sudo apt-get install -y mongodb-org
```

6. test mongodb has be installed
```
mongod --version

db version v4.0.5
git version: 3739429dd92b92d1b0ab120911a23d50bf03c412
OpenSSL version: OpenSSL 1.1.0g  2 Nov 2017
allocator: tcmalloc
modules: none
build environment:
    distmod: ubuntu1804
    distarch: x86_64
    target_arch: x86_64
```

good work!!

# How to run the service

The first time when you run the service, you should create a folder, by default, MongoDB uses `/data/db`.Please note this might be different in newer versions of MongoDB。To create the data folder, type and execute the following commands:
```
sudo mkdir -p /data/db
sudo chown `id -u` /data/db
```
We changed ownership of the folder to my user instead of it being a root whatever it was before.Science proved that not having follders owned by root, reduces the number of permission denied errors by 100%.

run the service
~~~
mongod
~~~

# MongoDB console in detail

MongoDB console syntax is javascript. That's wonderful.

There are some most useful MongoDB console shell commands.

* help: print a list of avariable commands
* show dbs: prints the names of the databases on hte database server to which the conosle is connected(by default is localhost:27017), but if we pass params to `mongo`, we can connect to any remote instance
* use db_name: switch the `db_name`
* show collections: prints a list of collection in the selected database
* db.collection_name.find()
* db.collection_name.findOne()
* db.collection_name.insert(): saves document in the collection_name collection--a shorthand fo upsert(no _id) or insert (with _id)
* db.collection_name.update()
* db.collection_name.save()
* db.collection_name.remove()
* printjson(document)

For example:
~~~
var a = db.message.findOne()
printjson(a)
a.text = 'hi'
printjson(a)
db.message.save(a)
~~~

`save()`works two ways. To sum up, `save()` works like an upsert(update of insert).If you have the _id which is unique MongoDB ID, then the document will be updated with whatever new properties were passed to the `save()` method.That's the previous example in which I create a new property text and assigned a value of hi to it.

When there's no _id, then MongoDB console will insert a new document and create a new document ID.

Compass is a MongoDB desktop tool, download Compass at [https://mongodb.com/products/compass](https://mongodb.com/products/compass)

One more useful MongDB command is `mongoimport`.It allow developers to supply a json file that will be imported to a database. Let's say you are migrating a database of have some initial data that you want to use, but the database is empty.Right now.
~~~
mongoimport --db dbName --collection collectionName --file filenam.json --jsonArray
~~~
You don't need to do anything extra to install `mongoimport`.It's already part of the MongoDB installation and lives in the same folder as mongod or mongo,i.e., `bin`.

# Minimalistic Native MongoDB Driver for node.js example

please read the documents and practice with the example.
[http://mongodb.github.io/node-mongodb-native/3](http://mongodb.github.io/node-mongodb-native/3)


